profiling results/Optimization note.md, before:

## Redundancy Optimization

This part will focus on part where it can be optimize by remove redundance work, **Architecture Optimization** will be much harder, since most of them will result in large refactoring, so we'll leave it for later.

### No optimization

![no opt image](01-%20No%20Optimization.png)

Look at the flame graph, we can see libgallium is screaming with thousands of draw call for just 1 single pixels

We can fix that by draw all to a streaming texture first, then to the main window texture later

Current code is at: 834816a344eed54964034a92c5edceeb87bb585b

### Texture lock optimized

![Tex lock](02-%20Texture%20Lock%20Optimized.png)

Compare to the previous graph where the draw function cost 9-10x of the update function, now they are mostly equally the same.

But now, we expose more flaws in the draw call:
- The ::at is showing possible improvement, since im using std::map, which is absolutely not necessary, we can fix this by using std::array instead
- Im clearing the streaming texture, which is quite wrong, and also doing unnecessary calculation for no sand cell


Current code is at: 648c55803b4015028f394ece587be643ae17f128


### `Grid::draw` calculation optimized

![grid draw cal](03-%20Grid::draw%20calculation%20Optimized.png)

The total cost of draw function is now so low, that update cost is doubled the cost of the draw itself

It's time to hunt the update function side

One weird thing i found, is that `Button::update` is even more expensive than `Animation::update`. Why?

Because if we looking at `Button::handle_event` in `Button.cpp`, we are copying the entire texture every time we move over (hover) a button, or click a button, this cost is super dodgable if we just use a pointer instead of copy the entire texture. (std::move time)

Actually, if we look at the animation spike, we also found `Surface::operator=` as a bottle neck too, since in the update function, it also constantly copying surface.

So let's do one thing, that is create a move operator for surface and ultilize it everywhere i should

Current code is at: 673510e49a20314843ec09425acbe1de716736a8

### `Surface` move semantics

![Surface move](./04-%20Surface%20move%20semantics.png)

Saying this is optimized by move semantic is kind of a scam, of course, looking at the result, we clearly see the spike literally disappear while the game rans fine, but for a different reason

My old code is so scrap, all i was doing was just literally change the way `Sprite` class works, i change from leaving the entire `Sprite::image` as a `Surface` to a pointer instead, and refactor all where it use `Sprite::image`

So all those optimization was just pointers, no move involve, but i guess we can save move for another optimization later on.

Focus on the update func, there're 2 main spike:
- `Grid::update_ghost_shape` (on the left of `redraw`)
- `TetriminoController::redraw` (which update the shape of the tetrimino "but only when it rotate")

But that's the thing, `redraw` only needed when rotate, but in `update` (which call every frame), i left it call `redraw` for some reason, so I simply remove it and do a quick re-profiling

![Remove redraw call](./04-1%20Remove%20unnecessary%20redraw%20call.png)

Which make the spike disappear completely. At this point, some how when remove `clock.tick`, it still only run at 150FPS.

Current code is at: 9f71107279e2c116a669ba27cae06e2d2cd25c29

### Ghost draw optimization


![alt text](./05-%20Remove%20unnecessary%20update%20ghost%20shape.png)

Just same as before, there was a unnecessary `Grid::update_ghost_shape` call from update func which call every frame

Simple as remove it, we now make the update function which before about equal to draw cost, now only 1/3 of it.

![alt text](./05-1%20Compare%20Draw%20to%20Update%20cost.png)

All above which:
- Reduce draw cost by 1/10
- Reduce update cost by 1/3

Was already **~30 times** faster main loop

Current code is at: 83a3b33230d53d6649279c526fd785b37fbf5cca

## Architecture Optimization

In this part, we will actually read the old implementation where it only focus on MVP, but not performance, so we will be hunting "hardware terror" part that need to be re-construct for better performance.

### `std::list` in `time` namespace

If we checkout `time` namespace implementation, we will find that it heavily depend on `elapsedTimes`, which is a `std::list`. This is a cache nightmare just to check FPS or get `delta_time`.

We can instead use a ring buffer by `std::array` to store the delta time, improve cache hit also mean better performance. 

Also, rely on SDL APIs mean we possibly can't move this to SDL3 if needed, so we will utilize `std::chrono` instead.

After an afternoon of crunching **CppCon by Howard Hinnant** about `std::chrono`, i decided to refactor time namespace like this:
- unified unit `duration<float64_t, seconds>` alias `duration_t`, which fits the needs for microsec precision
- reconstruct elapsedTimes to be `std::array<duration_t, 10>` ring buffer.
- and many others, visit the commit ID to see changes in `time.hpp` and `time.cpp`

![alt text](./06-%20Refactoring%20time%20namespace.png)

What surprise me, is that a simple act of change to `std::chrono` make update cost much less compare to draw, or, maybe draw got more expensive?

Since **percentage lies**, we need a better way to check what function cost more, not just look at which bars is longer.

Current code is at: 8755abc2edf607010d51c58caee0c61e61df51a2

### `Timer` in `time` namespaces

Commit message:

remove: vsync from renderer to remove frame limit to refresh rate feat: Timer, TimerManager and FunctionStat to easily benchmark function

profiling results/Optimization note.md, after:

## Redundancy Optimization

This part will focus on part where it can be optimize by remove redundance work, **Architecture Optimization** will be much harder, since most of them will result in large refactoring, so we'll leave it for later.

### No optimization

![no opt image](01-%20No%20Optimization.png)

Look at the flame graph, we can see libgallium is screaming with thousands of draw call for just 1 single pixels

We can fix that by draw all to a streaming texture first, then to the main window texture later

Current code is at: 834816a344eed54964034a92c5edceeb87bb585b

### Texture lock optimized

![Tex lock](02-%20Texture%20Lock%20Optimized.png)

Compare to the previous graph where the draw function cost 9-10x of the update function, now they are mostly equally the same.

But now, we expose more flaws in the draw call:
- The ::at is showing possible improvement, since im using std::map, which is absolutely not necessary, we can fix this by using std::array instead
- Im clearing the streaming texture, which is quite wrong, and also doing unnecessary calculation for no sand cell


Current code is at: 648c55803b4015028f394ece587be643ae17f128


### `Grid::draw` calculation optimized

![grid draw cal](03-%20Grid::draw%20calculation%20Optimized.png)

The total cost of draw function is now so low, that update cost is doubled the cost of the draw itself

It's time to hunt the update function side

One weird thing i found, is that `Button::update` is even more expensive than `Animation::update`. Why?

Because if we looking at `Button::handle_event` in `Button.cpp`, we are copying the entire texture every time we move over (hover) a button, or click a button, this cost is super dodgable if we just use a pointer instead of copy the entire texture. (std::move time)

Actually, if we look at the animation spike, we also found `Surface::operator=` as a bottle neck too, since in the update function, it also constantly copying surface.

So let's do one thing, that is create a move operator for surface and ultilize it everywhere i should

Current code is at: 673510e49a20314843ec09425acbe1de716736a8

### `Surface` move semantics

![Surface move](./04-%20Surface%20move%20semantics.png)

Saying this is optimized by move semantic is kind of a scam, of course, looking at the result, we clearly see the spike literally disappear while the game rans fine, but for a different reason

My old code is so scrap, all i was doing was just literally change the way `Sprite` class works, i change from leaving the entire `Sprite::image` as a `Surface` to a pointer instead, and refactor all where it use `Sprite::image`

So all those optimization was just pointers, no move involve, but i guess we can save move for another optimization later on.

Focus on the update func, there're 2 main spike:
- `Grid::update_ghost_shape` (on the left of `redraw`)
- `TetriminoController::redraw` (which update the shape of the tetrimino "but only when it rotate")

But that's the thing, `redraw` only needed when rotate, but in `update` (which call every frame), i left it call `redraw` for some reason, so I simply remove it and do a quick re-profiling

![Remove redraw call](./04-1%20Remove%20unnecessary%20redraw%20call.png)

Which make the spike disappear completely. At this point, some how when remove `clock.tick`, it still only run at 150FPS.

Current code is at: 9f71107279e2c116a669ba27cae06e2d2cd25c29

### Ghost draw optimization


![alt text](./05-%20Remove%20unnecessary%20update%20ghost%20shape.png)

Just same as before, there was a unnecessary `Grid::update_ghost_shape` call from update func which call every frame

Simple as remove it, we now make the update function which before about equal to draw cost, now only 1/3 of it.

![alt text](./05-1%20Compare%20Draw%20to%20Update%20cost.png)

All above which:
- Reduce draw cost by 1/10
- Reduce update cost by 1/3

Was already **~30 times** faster main loop

Current code is at: 83a3b33230d53d6649279c526fd785b37fbf5cca

## Architecture Optimization

In this part, we will actually read the old implementation where it only focus on MVP, but not performance, so we will be hunting "hardware terror" part that need to be re-construct for better performance.

### `std::list` in `time` namespace

If we checkout `time` namespace implementation, we will find that it heavily depend on `elapsedTimes`, which is a `std::list`. This is a cache nightmare just to check FPS or get `delta_time`.

We can instead use a ring buffer by `std::array` to store the delta time, improve cache hit also mean better performance. 

Also, rely on SDL APIs mean we possibly can't move this to SDL3 if needed, so we will utilize `std::chrono` instead.

After an afternoon of crunching **CppCon by Howard Hinnant** about `std::chrono`, i decided to refactor time namespace like this:
- unified unit `duration<float64_t, seconds>` alias `duration_t`, which fits the needs for microsec precision
- reconstruct elapsedTimes to be `std::array<duration_t, 10>` ring buffer.
- and many others, visit the commit ID to see changes in `time.hpp` and `time.cpp`

![alt text](./06-%20Refactoring%20time%20namespace.png)

What surprise me, is that a simple act of change to `std::chrono` make update cost much less compare to draw, or, maybe draw got more expensive?

Since **percentage lies**, we need a better way to check what function cost more, not just look at which bars is longer.

Current code is at: 8755abc2edf607010d51c58caee0c61e61df51a2

### Benchmarking

![alt text](./07-%20Vsync%20and%20Benchmark.png)

Turn out, the reason we got fixed at ~145 FPS is that i turned on vsync

Even when i got a result of ~6000 FPS, i wonder what if i go back to the worst implementation and just turn off vsync?
